Add vignette on `proportion_transmission()` methods (#101)
epiverse-trace/superspreading: vignettes/proportion_transmission.Rmd

---
title: "Methods for calculating the proportion of transmission"
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
bibliography: references.json
link-citations: true
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Methods for calculating the proportion of transmission}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)
```

> This vignette explores the `proportion_transmission()` function in {superspreading}. The function calculates what proportion of cases cause a certain proportion of transmission for an infectious disease outbreak. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This vignette explores the `proportion_transmission()` function in {superspreading}. The function calculates what proportion of cases we would expect to cause a certain proportion of transmission for a particular infectious disease (e.g. "how much transmission comes from the top 10% of infectious individuals?")
```

> The function is parameterised assuming that the offspring distribution of disease transmission is a negative binomial with parameters $R$, the mean of the negative binomial distribution and the average number of secondary cases caused by a primary case, and $k$, the dispersion parameter of the negative binomial distribution and controls the heterogeneity in transmission. A smaller $k$ results is more variability (overdispersion) in transmission and thus superspreading events are more likely. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To perform this calculation, we assume that the offspring distribution of disease transmission depends both on the distribution of individual variability in transmissibility, which we define using a Gamma distribution with mean $R$, as well as stochastic transmission within a population, which we define using a Poisson process, following @lloyd-smithSuperspreadingEffectIndividual2005.

If we put a Gamma distributed individual transmissibility into a Poisson distribution, the result a negative binomial distribution. This is defined by two parameters: $R$, the mean of the negative binomial distribution and the average number of secondary cases caused by a typical primary case; and $k$, the dispersion parameter of the negative binomial distribution and controls the heterogeneity in transmission. A smaller $k$ results is more variability (overdispersion) in transmission and thus superspreading events are more likely. 
```

Reviewer: Have added quite a bit of detail, but seemed a bit too 'light' to try and explain the below without pointing this out.

::: {.alert .alert-info}
Poisson and geometric offspring distributions are special cases of the negative binomial offspring distribution. By setting $k$ to `Inf` (or approximately infinite, $> 10^5$) then the offspring distribution is a Poisson distribution. By setting $k$ to 1 the offspring distribution is a geometric distribution.

It is currently not possible to calculate the proportion transmission using the Poisson-Lognormal and Poisson-Weibull distributions (whose density and cumulative distribution functions are included in the {superspreading} package).
:::

> The proportion of transmission can be calculated using two methods, both of which are included in the `proportion_transmission()` function and can be changed using the `method` argument. These methods are $p_{80}$ and $t_{20}$. The $p_{80}$ method is the default (`method = "p_80"`). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proportion of transmission can be calculated using two methods, both of which are included in the `proportion_transmission()` function and can be changed using the `method` argument. The first method focuses on transmission as it occurs in reality, accounting both for variation in the mean number of secondary cases at the individual *and* the stochastic nature of onwards transmission within a population; the second method focuses only on variation in the mean number of secondary cases at the individual level. The first method is denoted $p_{80}$ and the second $t_{20}$. The $p_{80}$ method is the default (`method = "p_80"`). 
```

::: {.alert .alert-danger}

> The output of `method = "p_80"` and `method = "t_20"` have different interpretations and cannot be used interchangeably without understanding the differences in output. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output of `method = "p_80"` and `method = "t_20"` have different interpretations and cannot be used interchangeably without understanding the differences in what they are measuring. 
```

> The output of `method = "p_80"` gives the proportion of cases that produce a certain proportion of transmission. The most common use case is calculating what proportion of cases cause 80% of transmission. Thus a small proportion in the output `<data.frame>` means that there is a lot of overdispersion in individual-level transmission. The `percent_transmission` argument when `method = "p_80"` is to set the proportion of transmission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output of `method = "p_80"` gives the proportion of cases that generate a certain proportion of realised transmission. The most common use case is calculating what proportion of cases would cause 80% of transmission during an outbreak of the infection. Thus a small proportion in the output `<data.frame>` means that there is a lot of overdispersion in individual-level transmission. The `percent_transmission` argument when `method = "p_80"` is to set the proportion of transmission.
```

> The output of `method = "t_20"` gives the proportion of cases that are produced by a certain proportion of the most infectious individuals. This is commonly used to calculate what proportion of cases are caused by the most infectious 20% of individuals. A high proportion in the output `<data.frame>` means that there is a lot of overdispersion in the transmission. The `percent_transmission` argument when `method = "t_20"` is to set the proportion of most infectious cases to calculate their proportion of total transmission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output of `method = "t_20"` gives the proportion of cases that we would expected to produced by a certain proportion of the most infectious individuals. This is commonly used to calculate what proportion of cases are expected to be caused by the most infectious 20% of individuals. A high proportion in the output `<data.frame>` means that there is a lot of overdispersion in the transmission. The `percent_transmission` argument when `method = "t_20"` is to set the proportion of most infectious cases to calculate their proportion of total transmission.

The key difference is that in a realised large outbreak (i.e. one that includes stochastic transmission), it is highly likely that some individuals will generate no secondary cases. This is because even a non-zero expected number of secondary cases can produce a zero when drawn from a Poisson process.
```

The plot uses an $R$ of 2, however, one characteristic of the $t_{20}$ method is that different values of $R$ do not influence the proportion of transmission, so the plot would look identical with other value of $R$. This is because as shown the equation defining the $t_{20}$ method above the integral is divided by $R_0$ so that only $f_{\nu}(u)$ control the proportion of transmission.

```{r}
# For k = 0.5
proportion_transmission(
  R = 0.1, k = 0.5, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "t_20"
)
proportion_transmission(
  R = 1, k = 0.5, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "t_20"
)
proportion_transmission(
  R = 5, k = 0.5, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "t_20"
)

# For k = 2
proportion_transmission(
  R = 0.1, k = 2, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "t_20"
)
proportion_transmission(
  R = 1, k = 2, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "t_20"
)
proportion_transmission(
  R = 5, k = 2, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "t_20"
)
```

This is not the case for $p_{80}$, where changes in both $R$ and $k$ influence the proportion of transmission.

```{r}
# For k = 0.5
proportion_transmission(
  R = 0.1, k = 0.5, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "p_80"
)

> proportion_transmission(

Reviewer: Duplicate of above?

Author: This is the same code but now using `method = "p_80"` instead of `method = "t_20"` to demonstrate the difference.

  R = 1, k = 0.5, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "p_80"
)
proportion_transmission(
  R = 5, k = 0.5, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "p_80"
)

# For k = 2
proportion_transmission(
  R = 0.1, k = 2, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "p_80"
)

> proportion_transmission(

Reviewer: Check for duplication

Author: The code is function is duplicated but the `R`, `k` and `method` arguments are being changed.

Author: I've added some text to give context in 66939a9d6fc3a068451df78dd0b4e85307254888.

  R = 1, k = 2, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "p_80"
)
proportion_transmission(
  R = 5, k = 2, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "p_80"
)
```

One thing that was mentioned above is that the interpretation of the $p_{80}$ and $t_{20}$ methods are not interchangeable, additionally, $t_{80}$ and $p_{20}$ are not equal. Stated differently, the $p_{80}$ method to calculate the proportion of transmission that cause 20% of cases, and the $t_{20}$ method to calculate the proportion of transmission caused by the most infectious 80% are not equivalent. It is also the case that $1 - p_{80} \neq t_{20}$, thus $1 - t_{20} \neq p_{80}$.

```{r}
# R = 1, k = 0.5
proportion_transmission(
  R = 1, k = 0.5, percent_transmission = 0.2, method = "p_80"
)
proportion_transmission(
  R = 1, k = 0.5, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "t_20"
)

# R = 3, k = 2
proportion_transmission(
  R = 3, k = 2, percent_transmission = 0.2, method = "p_80"
)
proportion_transmission(
  R = 3, k = 2, percent_transmission = 0.8, method = "t_20"
)
```

> ```{r}

Reviewer: Would benefit from a sentence ahead of each code chunk briefly saying what's being calculated (e.g. we look at three difference scenarios, or two different methods)

Author: I've added some text before this code block in 66939a9d6fc3a068451df78dd0b4e85307254888.
